# Analysis's Objective:

Determine genes that are differentially expressed at different stages in the development of Arabidopsis thaliana shoot apical meristem. We collected samples at day 8 and day 16 (files “Day8.fastq” and “Day16.fastq”).
The reference genome is “athal_chr.fa” and the reference gene annotations are in “athal_genes.gtf”. 

# I've recorded step-by-step to:
1. Index reference genome file using bowtie2-build
2. Align RNA-seq reads (fastq) with indexed reference genome using tophat. (fastq -> BAM)
3. Assemble aligned reads into genes and transcripts using cufflinks. (BAM -> transcripts.gtf)
4. Use cuffcompare to compare the assembled transcripts against a set of reference gene annotations, exon-by-exon, to determine which genes and transcripts in the sample are known, and which ones are likely novel.
5. Merge transcripts from 2 experimental conditions (Day 8 and Day 16) using cuffmerge. (gtf -> gtf)
6. Differential Expression with cuffdiff to compare expression levels between Day8 and Day16: run cuffdiff with the ‘merged.gtf’ file as reference annotation, taking as input the two alignment files. (BAM files generated by tophat -> diff)

To repreduce the analysis, download athal_chr.fa, athal_genes.gtf, Day8.fastq, Day16.fastq. Follow the instruction found in WSL_commands.ipynb. 
To view WSL_commands.ipynb, simply click on WSL_commands.ipynb while you're on this Github page. You can also download WSL_commands.ipynb and install Jupyter Notebook bash kernel to your command terminal (WSL) to view and edit the file. For windows, use Windows Subsystem for Linux (WSL). To keep the installed tools organized and easy to manage their version, install miniconda.
ChatGPT can help you install WSL, miniconda, and Jupyter Notebook bash kernel to WSL.

Tools used: samtools=1.2 bowtie2=2.2.5 tophat=2.0.14 cufflinks=2.2.1
